---
layout: sheet-post
title: Final Fantasy VIII - Force Your Way
sheet: Final Fantasy VIII - Force Your Way
---
As I've mentioned in a previous post, *Final Fantasy VIII* was the first Final Fantasy
game I really enjoyed playing. Part of the reason for that, actually, was the difference
in the feel of the boss fight themes in the two games. "Those Who Fight Further", to me,
feels like the sort of thing that you might hear in an arena. It's a fantastic tune and
definitely gets the listener in the mood to throw down. But "Force Your Way" makes me
think the stakes are a little higher, with its faster tempo and melodic runs. Basically,
I just thought "Force Your Way" fits better as a boss theme.

This track starts with syncopated hits emphasized by kick drum, which makes me think of
feeling the blood pumping in my ears. The rare snare drum hits keep the opening section
grounded, but only barely; and that goes out the window with the 5/4 bars and key change
halfway through. We get the same syncopated hits in B minor, only to get hit with a 6/4
bar right before the melody comes in.

In the [B] section, we hear an internal pedal figure which feels fairly common in Uematsu
themes. The melody is played twice starting on different notes, which is also
characteristic of Uematsu. However, after eight measures, we hit a breakdown section [C]
which has fast and furious arpeggios that disorient the listener before hitting a new
melodic figure, which again plays twice in two different keys.

After that, the rhythm again drops out in [D], and we have a melody that sticks to the G#
minor scale fairly closely, outside of the use of A natural (over an A minor chord) in
the middle to make it feel a little darker and more desperate. This melody peaks on a
very high B, making this the climax of the tune. After this, the rhythm is fully in, with
the high hat 16th figure adding some speed to the tune. The keyboard run builds the
energy until we explode into the high-powered [E] section.

In the [E] section, the melody and harmony are fairly simple, but the drums and sustained
rhythm guitar hits keep the pedal to the medal. There's another key change to B minor
with a similar melody, but Uematsu subverts our expectations this time by pivoting to
another breakdown and changing back to A minor, with a bVI to i to iv to i progression
that finally takes us back into the syncopated introduction. For extra pizzazz, Uematsu
lets the syncopated hits make a quick cameo to remind us how they sounded, and then he
lets the last note play right over the actual intro. We could say the introduction
"forced its way" back into the forefront! :joy:

All in all, this is one of my favorite VGM tunes of all time, and I'm very glad I finally
got to publish a lead sheet for it. I am not at all sure about the exact chords in the
breakdown at the beginning of the [C] section, especially the last one (I definitely hear
a G in the bass, but I'm not really sure what else is happening). But this should be
playable at least, and maybe somebody else will identify the right progression.
